New Post - Building a FAB component (#8707)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/building-a-fab-component/index.md

---
layout: post
title: Building a floating action button (FAB) component
subhead: A foundational overview of how to build color-adaptive, responsive, and accessible FAB components.
authors:
  - adamargyle
description: A foundational overview of how to build color-adaptive, responsive, and accessible FAB components.

> date: 2022-09-21

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2022-10-06
```

<style>
  .auto-aspect {
    aspect-ratio: auto;
  }
</style>

{% Video
  src="video/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/g3TG5gGs3qmGxBfaUIXf.mp4",
  autoplay="true",
  loop="true",
  muted="true",
  class="auto-aspect"
%}

If you prefer video, here's a YouTube version of this post:

{% YouTube 'RXopH5t2Kww' %}

## Overview

FABs are more common on mobile than desktop, but they're prevalent in both
scenarios. They keep primary actions in view, making them convenient and
omnipresent. This user experience style was made famous by Material UI and their
suggestions for usage and placement can be [found
here](https://material.io/components/buttons-floating-action-button).

## Elements and styles

The HTML for these controls involves a container element and a set of one or
more buttons. The container positions the FABs within the viewport and manages a
gap between the buttons. The buttons can be mini or default, giving some nice
variety between primary and secondary actions.

### FAB container

This element can be a regular `<div>` but let's do our unsighted users a favor
and tag it with some helpful attributes to explain the purpose and contents of
this container.

#### FABs markup

> Start with a ".fabs" class for CSS to hook into for style, then add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start with a `.fabs` class for CSS to hook into for style, then add
```

position will compliment the user's document mode, like right-to-left or
left-to-right. Custom properties are also used to prevent repetition and ensure
equal distance from the bottom and side edges of the viewport:

```css
.fabs {
  --_viewport-margin: 2.5vmin;

  position: fixed;
  z-index: var(--layer-1);

  inset-block: auto var(--_viewport-margin);
  inset-inline: auto var(--_viewport-margin);
}
```

Next I give the container display
[`flex`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/CSS/flex) and change its
layout direction to
[`column-reverse`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/CSS/flex-direction).
This stacks the children on top of each other (column) and also reverses their
visual order. This has the effect of making the first focusable element the
bottom element instead of the top, which would be where focus goes normally per
the HTML document. Reversing the visual order unites the experience for sighted
users and keyboard users, as the styling of the primary action as larger than
the mini buttons indicates to sighted users that it's a primary action, and
keyboard users will focus it as the first item in the source.

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/PkRWiv4mtfCDXujti7lL.png", alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="501" %}

Reviewer: This needs alt text.

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/PkRWiv4mtfCDXujti7lL.png", alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="501" %}

Author: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/PkRWiv4mtfCDXujti7lL.png", alt="Two fab buttons are shown with DevTools overlaying their grid layout. Shows the gap between them with a striped pattern and also shows their computed height and width.", width="800", height="501" %}
```

Next add some styles to help the SVG icons fit the space.

```css
.fab {
  …

  & > svg {
    inline-size: var(--_size);
    block-size: var(--_size);
    stroke-width: 3px;
  }
}
```

Last, remove the tap highlight from the button since we've added our own visual
feedback for interaction:

```css
.fab {
  -webkit-tap-highlight-color: transparent;
}
```

{% Video
  src="video/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/qjMTHfEqKa6o2zRRcvKg.mp4",
  autoplay="true",
  loop="true",
  muted="true",
  class="auto-aspect"
%}

#### Mini FAB

The goal of this section is to create a variant for the FAB button. By making
some of the FABs smaller than the default action, we can promote the action the
user performs the most often.

##### Mini FAB markup

The HTML is the same as a FAB but we add a ".mini" class to give CSS a hook into
the variant.

```html
<button data-icon="heart" class="fab mini" title="Like action" aria-label="Like action">
  <svg aria-hidden="true" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24">...</svg>
</button>
```

##### Mini FAB style

Thanks to usage of custom properties, the only change needed is an adjustment to
the `--_size` variable.

```css
.fab.mini {
  --_size: 1.25rem;
}
```

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/bYhvGgYmV0OiztY7j58r.png", alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="664", height="410" %}

Reviewer: also missing alt text

Author: ty, got em!

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/bYhvGgYmV0OiztY7j58r.png", alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="664", height="410" %}

Author: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/bYhvGgYmV0OiztY7j58r.png", alt="A screenshot of the two fab buttons stacked and the top button is smaller than the one on the bottom.", width="664", height="410" %}
```
